[Music]
Good day, I'm Norman Wildberger. Today
we're going to carry on talking about
patterns in algebra. Our aim is to move towards
setting up proper foundations for algebra,
which means defining rather carefully and clearly
what the main objects of interest are. So far,
we've been exploring a number of different
realms within algebra, within baby algebra,
different aspects of the way polynomials
appear. We're going to continue with that
today and talk about different ways of approaching
sequences and patterns that naturally appear.
Last time, we talked about the table of
differences formed by the triangular numbers,
and I'm going to adjust my notation a
little bit now to make it a little bit
more methodical. Instead of having the difference
2 between 1 and 3 directly above both of them,
I'm going to move over a little bit to the
right so that now 1 plus 2 equals 3. So again,
this thing here represents the
difference between the 6 and the 10.
Here's our sequence of triangular numbers whose
nth term is n times (n + 1) over 2. There,
the differences are, of course, just the
natural numbers themselves. The differences
between them are all 1, and the differences
between all the ones are all zeros. But when
we go up in this pattern, things become
simpler. When we go down in the pattern,
they become a little bit more complicated.
So for example, if we start with 1,
then this would have to be 4 so that 1 plus
3 is 4. So we had a new sequence of numbers,
which might be called the tetrahedral numbers. In
this sequence, the 20 represents the sum 1 plus
3 plus 6 plus 10. So each one of these numbers
is the sum of the first n triangular numbers.
Here's the geometrical interpretation of the
tetrahedral numbers. Something like 20 can be
thought of in terms of a three-dimensional stack
of triangular numbers. There's one, there's three,
there's six, there's ten. They're sort of stacked
up on top of each other to form a tetrahedron.
This has a physical interpretation in terms of
a stack of cannonballs. So if you imagine this
bottom layer representing ten cannonballs,
the green ones here arranged in a triangle,
then on top of those ten cannonballs we can
stack six more in the indents formed by three
bottom-layer ones. So there are six on top
of them, and then we could furthermore stack
another three on top of those, and then one on the
top, giving us a nice little tetrahedral pyramid.
Alright, so that's a physical meaning to these
tetrahedral numbers, and it turns out that their
formula is given by this polynomial expression:
n times (n + 1) times (n + 2) divided by 6.
You might like to check that, and even better,
you might like to try to prove that that's the
formula. I'll tell you later on how to do that in
a more systematic way. Of course, we can continue.
We could then ask, well, what are the sums of the
tetrahedral numbers? In keeping with this picture,
you might think that these numbers represent some
kind of four-dimensional stack of cannonballs,
and one can, in fact, make that precise. So
as we carry on down in this pattern, we are in
fact investigating higher-dimensional analogs
of tetrahedrons or triangles. It's a rather
interesting pattern, and it all comes about
essentially built up from the natural numbers.
So here are those square numbers: 1, 4, 9, 16,
with a table of differences that they generate.
The differences between the square numbers are
the successive odd numbers, and the differences
between the odd numbers are always 2, and the
differences between the twos are 0. If we go down,
it becomes a little bit more complicated and
creates a new sequence so that this is the
differences in this new sequence. Well, that would
mean that 1 plus 4 would have to be equal to 5,
5 plus 9 would be 14, 14 plus 16 equals 30,
and so on. So it's easy to generate this once
you've generated the line above it. The square
numbers, of course, have the formula n squared,
and we saw last time, or I stated last time,
that the sum of the first n squares has this
particular polynomial formula: n times
(n + 1) times (2n + 1) divided by 6.
These numbers also have a nice geometrical
interpretation also in terms of a stack of
cannonballs, but this time a rather more wobbly
stack. A stack where you decide to arrange the
bottom layer in a square—maybe you have a square
box to fit the cannonballs in. Now we have four
this way by four this way, so 16 on the bottom
layer represented by these 16 dots here. Then in
the indents formed by them, nine in the layer
above them represented by this little square,
and then above them you could fit four more in,
and one up at the very top. The whole number
in this particular pyramidal array would
be 1 plus 4 plus 9 plus 16, which is 30.
It's not at all so obvious how to define
pentagonal numbers, especially since fitting
cannonballs around layers of five doesn't work
very well, but here's one natural approach that's
been studied for a long time. We start with a
pentagon with one cannonball right in the middle,
and then we enlarge that picture—so we'll put that
one right there—by adding another layer, making
a bigger pentagon around the original one. Then
there are three more sides with two on each side,
so we're adding four to get a total of five. Then
in the next step, we copy this picture over here,
and then we add another layer, or as maybe
the ancient Greeks would call such a thing,
an "omen," another layer of cannonballs, this time
three on each side of three sides, getting a total
of twelve. We can continue this; at each stage,
we add another layer. Now this layer has four,
four, four in each of the three rows that we're
adding to the original. In this way, we get a
sequence of numbers which we might call pentagonal
numbers: 1, 5, 12, 22, and it's a nice exercise
to try to convince yourself that the formula for
P_n is this thing here: n times (3n - 1) over 2.
Let's have a look at the table of differences
that this sequence generates. Here are our
pentagonal numbers, and here are the differences
between the pentagonal numbers, starting with 4,
then 7, then 10, then 13. We see that there's
a pattern between the differences which is made
clear if we go up and talk about the
differences between the differences:
then it is simply all threes. So now it's clear
how to extend this table. We could carry on this
way without actually drawing pictures, just by
extending the table of differences. This would
allow us to carry on. We can also extend, as
we did before, to higher-dimensional analogs.
In this case, it's not so clear what it means.
So we can start with a 1 here and then create
a new line whose line of differences is this
one. So 1 + 5 is 6, 6 + 12 is 18, and so on.
Does it make sense to extend this
table to the left? Well, if we do,
there's only really one reasonable way of doing it
because this pattern of threes obviously wants to
continue. So we have to continue this pattern of
threes. Well, if this is a three and that's four,
that we know, then this has got to be one
because this plus this has got to be this.
Then this has to be minus 2 because this
plus three has to equal one—that's forced.
And then that's forced, and that's forced.
Now we're getting going down by three here.
Now what happens to the pentagonal numbers
themselves when we extend them? Here there's a
one, here there's one, there must be a zero here,
and two plus minus two is zero. That's got to be
two, that's got to be seven in order for seven
plus minus five to equal two. That's got to be
fifteen, that's got to be twenty-six, and now it
seems as if we're getting another second series
of pentagonal numbers which are not, at least at
first, recognizable in a geometrical form. So the
question is, are these numbers 2, 7, 15, 26 also
pentagonal numbers? And if so, what do they mean?
It turns out there's a very interesting piece
of evidence for this. It's not just an armchair
exercise; there's a piece of solid mathematical
evidence that comes to play, discovered by the
greatest mathematician of modern times, who is
Leonard Euler. He discovered that pentagonal
numbers are not just geometrical curiosities but
are intimately connected with some other things,
in particular with number theory. I'm going
to tell you about that next time when I talk
about Leonard Euler and how he essentially
resolved this question—a very interesting
development. I hope you'll join me for that.
I'm Norman Wildberger. Thanks for listening.
[Music]